<!--
.. title: wxPython 4.0.0b1 Released
.. slug: wxpython-4.0.0b1-release
.. date: 2017-07-22 16:35:19 UTC
.. tags: Development, Release, Phoenix
.. category: News
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

**wxPython 4.0.0b1** is now available at 
[PyPI](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/wxPython/4.0.0b1), with some 
additional files at the 
[Extras archive](https://extras.wxPython.org/wxPython4/extras/).

Changes in this release include the following:

<!-- TEASER_END -->

* Various little tweaks and fixes in some of the demo samples.

* Fixes in wx.lib.imagebrowser so it looks and acts better on OSX.

* Fixed problem due to wxModules not being initialized when non-core
  extensions are imported.

* Fixed issue in wx.TreeItemId comparison methods affecting PyCrust and
  other tools.

* Restore the simplified names for the wxGridSelectionModes enum that were
  present in Classic.

* Add accessors for the internal widgets in the wx.EditableListBox.

* Fixes in wx.lib.eventwatcher to avoid deprecated methods and other Phoenix
  related changes.

* Correctly transfer ownership of the input stream in wx.FSFile.

* Ensure the license files are getting into the source tarball and the
  binary wheel files.

* Add wrappers for the classes derived from wxImageHandler.

* Fix wx.lib.plot.polyline to not attempt to draw the spline if there are
  less than 3 points.

* Transfer the ownership of the prop arg in wx.propgrid.PGProperty.AddChild
  and AddPrivateChild. Various other fixes in wx.propgrid classes for
  backwards compatibility and to fix problems caused by mismatches between
  customizations that were done for Classic and how Phoenix does things by
  default. Also solved some problems in the PropertyGrid sample in the demo.

* Add missing HtmlCell.FindCellByPos.

* Enhance the DLG_UNIT convenience function such that if something other than
  a wx.Point or wx.Size was passed in then the return value will be a tuple.
  This eliminates some surprises that are possible due to auto-conversion of
  tuples to points or sizes.


