<!--
.. title: wxPython 4.0.0b2 Released
.. slug: wxpython-4.0.0b2-release
.. date: 2017-09-16 19:33:44 UTC
.. tags: Development, Release, Phoenix
.. category: News
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

**wxPython 4.0.0b2** is now available at 
[PyPI](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/wxPython/4.0.0b2), with some 
additional files at the 
[Extras archive](https://extras.wxPython.org/wxPython4/extras/).

Changes in this release include the following:

<!-- TEASER_END -->

!!! note     
    Due to file size limits at PyPI the Sphinx source for the wxPython API
    documentation was removed from the wxPython source tarball so the file
    could be uploaded. The standalone documentation tarball at the 
    [extras archive](https://extras.wxPython.org/wxPython4/extras/) 
    was unaffected.

* Added a deprecated compatibility helper for wx.CustomDataFormat.

* Transfer ownership of the wx.EvtHandler object when pushing/popping
  them, and also for Set/RemoveEventHandler. (#443)

* Add missing wx.VScrolledWindow methods listed in the docs as
  deprecated but still present. (#441)

* Fixed copy/paste error in wx.BusyInfo.\_\_exit\_\_ (#449)

* Added new tool wxget, (a minimal wx implementation of wget)

* Added new tools wxdocs and wxdemos to launch the respective items,
  fetching and unpacking as required. (#437)

* Fixes to ensure that the locale message catalogs are included in the
  release files. (#464)

* Fix wx.ListCtrl.SetItemData to check that the data value is not out
  of the range of a C long. (#467)

* Changed the default port on \*nix builds to be GTK3. The new
  ``--gtk2`` flag for build.py can be used to force a build for GTK2
  instead, and the ``--gtk3`` flag still exists, but defaults to True
  unless ``--gtk2`` is specified. Please note that there is currently
  no auto-detection of whether GTK3 is available or not, so if you
  know you need to build for GTK2 then you need to use the build flag,
  and there is currently no way to specify that flag for builds
  performed by pip. (#431)

* Fix parameter names in Toolbar.AddTool methods to be
  consistent. (#475)

* Remove inconsistent GetVirtualSize method in ScrolledWindow and let
  it be inherited from wx.Window instead. (#474)

* Fix crashing bug caused by importing a module that reinitializes the
  wxModule system after having imported wxpyTag. (#468)

* Fix missing methods in various DataObject classes. (They were
  actually accidentally marked "private" when they should have been
  public.) (#480)

* Add missing ListCtrl.DeleteAllColumns. (#486)

* Various fixes in the demo.

* Fixed improper initial scale factor in wx.lib.agw.speedmeter

* Fix for calls to wx.Notebook.HitTest calling the wrong instance
  (base class version) of the method. (#499)

* Add wx.Simplebook class.

* Fix exception in wx.lib.agw.customtreectrl when calling
  SortChildren. (#463, #500)

* Fix missing imports needed for drawing the legend in
  wx.lib.plot. (#503)

* Fix other instances of list.sort using old cmp-style ordering
  functions.  (#508)

* Update SizedControls to do a sanity check on the parent's sizer, as
  GetSizer can return None for SizedParent under certain
  circumstances, such as when AUI reparents the control during pane
  movement. (#523, #537)

* Added Vagrant configs for Fedora 23 and Fedora 26, and dropped
  Fedora 24.  Wheels built on F23 can also be used on F24 and F25, and
  F26 adds Python 3.6 support.

* Fix bitwise OR bug in wx.lib.agw.aui.framemanager. (#493)

* Fix bugs in wx.lib.plot when saving file. (#526)

* Fix integer division bug in ultimatelistctrl. (#528)

* Fix bug in wx.SearchCtrl.SetCancelBitmap (#532)

* Fixed property grid SetPropertyValue method to not truncate floating
  point values to integers, and a couple other possible incorrect
  conversions.  (#536)

